Title: Teaching Sunday School, Pt. 2
Date: 2011-07-25 17:09
Author: nocoolnametom
Category: New Testament, Sunday School
Slug: teaching-sunday-school-pt-2

Wow, I forgot that this blog was part of an aggregator (sorry,  
[Main Street Plaza][]). I kinda thought my words  
were just flying off into the private, digital realm of the Internet.
Silly me,  
nothing on the Internet is ever private. If you're reading this,
please  
understand that I'm pretty much approaching this as a rant flying off
into *teh  
intarwebs*. Make of it what you will (along with the constant
grammatical  
mistakes where my fingers fly a little bit ahead of my brain). If you
have  
questions about my teaching Sunday School, go ahead and ask them and I
answer  
them as best as I can.<!--more-->

Well, continuing the posts about my teaching of class, I'm not sure what
anyone  
else is expecting. I'm not even sure what *I* was expecting when I
started. Part  
of me wanted to teach these kids critical thinking skills and an
approach that  
would lead them to understand how non-divine the Bible is. Another part
of me  
still wanted that "Mormon Pride" of being an awesome Gospel Doctrine
teacher: to  
fill these kids with what they would feel was the Spirit of God and
would lead  
them to be good Mormons.

So far now, about halfway through the year I think I'm still somewhere
in the  
middle of things. I don't believe that God, if He (or She, or They)
exists,  
really cares much about my little old classroom, and I doubt that "the
Spirit"  
people in the LDS Church claim to feel is anything more than a good
feeling.  
Thus, it's something of a fool's errand for me to teach in such a way
that my  
class can "feel the Spirit". But that doesn't mean that I don't know
the  
process, the intonation, and the subjects that would cause my class to
feel, for  
themselves, that "something special" was being taught. I can't say that
I've  
avoided it. There have been some weeks where, after class, the kids
will tell me  
that they "felt the Spirit really strongly." I always smile to them and
thank  
them, because from them it's really a sort of praise and it'd be pretty
rude to  
shoot that stuff down. But in the end, I've tried to keep away from
the  
emotional theatrics and I don't think anyone has minded.

I've also not been able to keep things in a purely secular sense. As a
Gospel  
Doctrine teacher, I "team teach" with another teacher. We take turns
with a  
lesson every other week and assist each other on the other week. I've
had a few  
different "team teachers" and I know well enough that while the 16-17
year olds  
I teach are open to simply learning for learning's sake, my team
teachers are  
actually the people that I need to watch myself around. Each TT has,
at  
different points, come up to me after class and mentioned that they're
grateful  
for the historical and linguistic knowledge I bring to class, but that
we need  
to prepare these kids spiritually as well as mentally. Usually this
comes up  
after I say something that, while unnoticed by the kids, catches the
attention  
of the TT in an uncomfortable way. "The author of Mark says..." "Well,
we  
shouldn't be surprised to find this here; remember that the author of
Matthew is  
a very Jewish Christian and loves the Law of Moses..." "The gospels are
not  
histories, they're testimonies and tracts. We shouldn't be surprised
that they  
tend to use history as a tool to tell their story and bend it to fit
their  
purpose when they want to." (I should note that each of those comments
was made  
*in response* to a question from the class, by the way. I'm not one to
make  
waves for the fun of it.)

In the end, I seem to have adopted a middle road of radical
ecumenicalism. The  
kids know (and have commented to be about it, positively) that I'll
make use of  
other Christian religions to make my points often. For myself, if we're
talking  
about the Christian New Testament, then we shouldn't behave as though
people  
only started trying to figure this stuff out after 1820. There have
been two  
millennia of Christians and they have wrestled with their texts for
countless  
centuries. In my class, those debates *count.* We've talked slightly
of  
Pelagius, Augustine, and Original Sin (for a while they knew what the
word  
"Semi-Pelagian" meant). We'd discussed Luther and the roots of the
Protestant  
Movement. We've discussed modern Christianity's approach to the
Trinity, as well  
as Mormonism's bastardized version of what "those Christians" believe.

In fact, that was probably the first time when I thought that I could
keep doing  
this job. It was only a few weeks after I had started, and I was still
trying to  
get into the swing of things. I'd established my preparation methods:
look up  
the scriptures in the manual, read them, prepare my own lesson based on
the  
scriptures read, and (finally) look at the LDS Sunday School manual to
see what  
*their* recommended lesson suggested. Usually I covered many of the
same points,  
but my own preparations avoided a lot of the "LDS-ness" that the manual
seemed  
to convey. The lessons were fun, but I was still struggling with my
purpose, as  
a closeted non-believer, in teaching a class that was supposed to be
about  
"Gospel Doctrine". Just the mental masturbation about being flattered
as "so  
smart" by everyone wasn't going to cut it (and it's not that I'm smart
-- I'm  
not any smarter than plenty of other people within or outside the LDS
Church --  
I'm just more well-read in archeological and theological materials and
have good  
retention of what I read).

The lesson was on the Baptism of Jesus. I started off by mentioning that
this is  
one of the parts of Jesus's life that everyone, whether Christian or
not,  
believe occurred (well, assuming you believe that Jesus of Nazareth
existed, but  
I have little patience for Jesus Mythicists, but that's a question for
another  
time). I went over the "Criterion of Embarrassment" for a bit (not by
name, of  
course, because that's a mouthful), but I mentioned that few people
felt that  
starting off your gospel by having Jesus receive baptism from someone
else  
really put Jesus in a good light, but actually made him seem somewhat  
subservient to John. Then we got to the baptism, and I pointed out the
various  
accounts from Mark and John (pointing out that they were probably the
only  
unique authors, since Matthew and Luke were pretty much re-writing Mark
for  
their Gospels). As we started to move away to the next point my TT
stopped me.

"We should also point out that all three members of the Godhead are
present  
here."

Me, uncomfortably knowing where this is going, and trying to keep it
within the  
text: "Yes, they are. We have God the Father speaking from heaven, God
the son  
(in John, at least) in the water, and God the Spirit as a dove
appearing. This  
is the beginning of Jesus's ministry, and we can see that he is sent by
God  
because of the miraculous beginnings described by the authors here."

"But it's also important to note that all *three* members of the Godhead
are  
present here. Some people would say that this would be impossible."

I *really* don't want to go there. "Who specifically would say that?"

"Well, all of the other Christians believe that God, Jesus, and the Holy
Ghost  
are all the same person."

"I guess none of those billions of other Christians throughout history
ever  
thought to actually read their Gospels and discover the truth hidden in
plan  
sight within this story here?"

Uncomfortable silence, which, in retrospect I probably deserved for
throwing  
down the gauntlet so hard. Well, time to pick up the pieces. I turned
to the  
class. "Since I'm not technically a 'traditional' or 'orthodox'
Christian, I'm  
probably not the most qualified person in the world to tell you what
they  
believe, but I guess we could talk a little bit about this, if you'd
like?"

Since my class, being teenagers, is *always* up for a tangent to the
lesson,  
they readily agreed. So I began by explaining that Christians were, of
course,  
*very* well aware of the Baptism of Jesus. So how to they deal with it?
They  
deal with it well enough, it's not some horrible problem they don't
know how to  
resolve.

The problem, I continued, is that we Mormons have a very poor
understanding of  
the doctrine of the Trinity. In Greek, the Trinity is described with
the word  
*homoousia*, which can roughly mean "the same being" or "the same
nature". Ousia  
is much like our English world "being" if looked carefully at it as a
verb:  
"present tense 'To be'" (though note that it is an adjective, *not* the
actual  
"to be" verb of Greek; it's just that *ousia* covers a similarly wide
range of  
meaning). What does it mean "to be"? Existence, nature, substance,
essence, and  
so forth. The classic definition of the Trinity, as set forth in the
1st Council  
of Nicea (and I also pointed out that Nicea nearly always get's a bad
wrap among  
us Mormons unnecessarily *[I plan on writing a series, if I ever get
time, going  
over the history and context of the early councils for the purpose of
presenting  
them to Mormons accurately instead of the jumbled anti-Catholic and
anti-  
Trinitarian 'just-so' stories that LDS like to tell themselves about
Nicea.]*),  
was that all members of the Trinity were of the same *ousia,* or
"being". At  
different times through history that has been interpreted strongly, as
though  
they shared the same experience and were nearly the same entity, but
other times  
that has been interpreted loosely, as though they shared merely the
same  
divinity and purpose. I've heard the Trinity described by some loose  
Trinitarians as a sports team, a single unified team of individuals
that work  
towards the same goal. I mentioned as well that among traditional
Christians  
"Modalism", or the belief that there is *only* one God and that He
expresses  
himself at various times as either the Father, the Son, or the Holy
Ghost was  
actually a heresy (a word I also had to define, as they'd never heard
of it  
before). Thus, Christians have to walk the knife's edge of doctrine
between  
Modalism and Polytheism; they've had a few centuries to figure it out,
and  
they're pretty good about keeping their balance collectively, though
you'll  
certainly find individuals who are modalists or polytheists. Mormonism
ignores  
the problem by simply declaring itself polytheist, but even for us it's
not that  
simple: even the Book of Mormon sounds, throughout most of its pages,
like a  
modalist document. Much Mormon Apologist ink has been spilled trying to
recover  
the Book of Mormon from modalism, to varying levels of success.

So in the end, I told them, the Trinity is actually a somewhat
complicated  
belief. Many Christians love and adore the complexity and
incomprehensibility of  
it. I mentioned that we Mormons also have our own mysteries that we
love where  
the very mysteriousness of the doctrine makes it seem greater to us,
with the  
best example of this being the Atonement. We routinely hear from
various people  
that how the Atonement actually occurred at one time for all people is
a mystery  
beyond understanding, and yet nobody in the LDS Church seems to find
this  
problematic. Instead, many Mormons *love* the idea all the more for
not  
understanding it (I'd even argue that the doctrine *isn't* all that
difficult to  
comprehend, but that we enjoy the mystery of it so much that we
actively play it  
up amongst each other). The Trinity is the same way for many
Christians; they  
love it and treasure it.

And then at the end of my ecumenical rant, an interesting thing
happened. One of  
the kids raised his hand.

"One of my friends at school is a Christian. Well, I mean a
*non-Mormon*  
Christian. I don't know what he believes about the Trinity. I've never
actually  
asked him. I know he's gotten made fun of because of it before, but
he's never  
actually told me what he believes. I'm going to go and ask him about
it."

Suddenly the class was all talking amongst themselves about their
Christian  
friends at school (I didn't know that there *were* enough non-Mormons
in Utah  
Valley for everyone to know someone, but I guess there are). And this
*wasn't*  
in the typical, "let's get to know you just enough so that we can
convert  
you"-type discussion. These kids were actually talking amongst
themselves in  
pure curiosity about a doctrine that none of them had been raised to
believe in,  
but that perhaps some of their friends believed. It was, even for
someone like  
me, who no longer believes in the LDS Church, or even in the divinity
of Jesus  
of Nazareth, a truly heart-warming experience.

Perhaps that *was* the Spirit then? I don't know; I personally doubt it,
but  
that doesn't mean I'm correct in doing so. I think it was an honest
pride in  
these kids being willing to explore the ideas of others. When we got to
class  
next week I asked if anyone had talked to their friends. Only the one
boy had,  
and he said that his friend wasn't really that religious and didn't
actually  
know what he felt about the Trinity. But he apparently appreciated
someone  
*asking him* about *his* beliefs because that never happened; it was
usually the  
other way around.

And so this is the middle road I currently try to travel. My goal in
class isn't  
to help these kids be better Mormons and egt to some "Celestial
Kingdom", nor is  
it to be better biblical scholars. Instead, my goal is to give them the
tools to  
become the people that the LDS Church, one of the most disliked
minority  
religions in America, needs: open to others, open to discussion, open
to  
research, open to debate, and, above all, open to loving their fellow
humans. My  
lessons, when I can get them to be applied to to us modern humans, tend
to focus  
on helping others, on the messages of inclusion, assistance, and grace
that are  
in the Gospels (yes, there's plenty about "justice", vengeance,
punishment, and  
other horrible things, but these kids are going to hear enough about
the  
"justice" of God as they continue in the LDS Church).

Next post, I'll talk a bit about how the bishop's felt about all of this
as I've  
talked with him more than I imagine most teachers do.

  [Main Street Plaza]: http://latterdaymainstreet.com
