Title: The First Post (Retroactively Written)
Date: 2011-01-01 12:00
Author: nocoolnametom
Category: Uncategorized
Slug: the-first-post-retroactively-written
Alias: /2011/01/01/the-first-post-retroactively-written/

The first post. Chances are that, should I actually get the habit of blogging going, this post will only really be seen by a very few people who choose to jump back to the beginning. So I'm talking to you guys, the ones who want to know how the posts began. This isn't the first attempt at blogging I've had. It probably won't be the last. It seems I am destined to have dozens of projects halfway finished. I've still got the comic-book journal from my mission with the last month waiting to be drawn from the scripts I wrote. I have the scripts for the Book of Lemuel deconstruction of 1 and 2 Nephi sitting on Dropbox somewhere. I have copious amounts of notes and copied sources and a single chapter of a planned book of the Council of Nicea intended for Mormons who think that their straw-man version of Trinitarianism was invented and inserted into Christianity at the Council. I have the outline for a half-dozen novels and a number of first and even second-draft short stories. I have a small box of computer parts for the never-arriving day when I'll "need" them to fix something on a device in my house. Two Raspberry Pis sit lonely and forgone on my shelves. It's a somewhat depressing list, to be honest. I can keep going, too, with countless other opportunities and enterprises that sit in my memory with the pain of "if-only". I can only hope that those of you who are coming back in time to see this post can tell that things are better, that things have changed. Because at this point in my life, they have, and I expect some things in the future to be better. To be *finished.* I recently moved to the Bay in an attempt to be involved in something bigger and to get out of Utah. It seemed at the time like a fantastic idea: I was still a closeted "Post-Mormon" struggling with adapting to my newly shattered faith. Rebuilding was difficult when I was surrounded on all sides, from home to work to friends, with the LDS Church. It wasn't like anyone was *trying* to be problematic, but it was getting painful to be seen and treated as a member of the "in-group" when I really was no longer there. And suddenly things said constantly about those not within that group, whether they were people who had left, traditional Christians, Democrats, or whatever, really started to take a toll when I realized that much of the negative things said about those groups by my peers secretly applied in many ways to myself. That hurt. Plus, I was dealing with all of the emotions that apply such a painful transition: guilt, fear, and anger. It wasn't good or healthy. So a move seemed a good idea. And at first it was; almost immediately we felt free to explore Sundays on our own terms, whether or not to attend or whether or not to attend services at other churches. We went to the Unitarian Universalists for a while, but the shock of the difference really kept us from feeling comfortable there. Nobody at my job assumed I was Mormon (if they thought so from my being from Utah, seeing me with a coffee or a beer at movie night probably changed that view pretty quickly). But everything wasn't peachy-keen. Moving introduced us first to something we hadn't really expected: loneliness. We had friends in the area, to be sure, but they were either busy with their own lives or lived too far away to really hang out. But without a ward to provide Insta-Friends (just add a handshake and a shared worldview) we quickly realized how lonely we were. And from that came other problems. I thought I had licked my issues with depression years ago when I weaned myself off of anti-depressant medication during my mission. At the time it had felt like a victory of my spirit over my body. Looking back over the past decade, though, that was one of the worst decisions I could have made. With the benefit of hindsight, I can see that depression continued to stalk by life and combined in a terribly damaging way with the guilt my own personal Mormon beliefs produced within me. Admitting to myself that I no longer believed in the faith claims of the LDS Church for very valid reasons helped me to overcome the guilt, but I had never dealt with the issues of depression. And I had other issues: perfectionism that manifested itself as laziness and procrastination, issues accepting myself as a sexual human being, and trust issues with myself and those closest to me. Anxiety, produced by the deeply-run ruts through my depressed brain, began to arise at work as I found myself faced with a pace and with issues that I had not yet had to deal with; I was surrounded by a culture of people smarter and more skilled than I was. I had always beforehand been surrounded by peers or people I felt superior to.  It didn't just hurt my pride, it made me constantly worry about my appearance. Which, ironically, led to a bad appearance. Which ultimately led to me being given notice to find a new job. Finally, about a month and a half before being told to look elsewhere, I was able to start getting some help through my insurance provider. While they don't offer counseling, instead preferring to focus on group therapies, they do have roughly monthly sessions with psychologists to evaluate how group therapy is going and to evaluate change. I've only met with the psychologist twice now, but having not done so for over a decade and finally having the ability to try and be honey with him I was amazed what came out. I have expected to talk about depression and anxiety; instead I talked about the Church. I talked about my anger, about how much I resented never really having a choice in my belief and in the lost opportunities I could have had without it. I said so many things that I didn't realize were true until they had left my mouth that it was overwhelming each time. How I've hated myself in times past, how I kinda like myself now but still think I'm not worth liking. How I still feel caught between the man I was raised to be and the man I've always wanted to be. How I yearn for my parent's pride and approval, and how I know that approval is mostly based on how closely I adhere to the life plan I was raised with by them and by the Church. The anger I feel because of the view of sexuality I developed as a teenager, tempered with the constant caution taught in the Young Mens Program and the shame and guilt of doing what pretty much all young men do. Is the Church the source of my problems? I don't know, but I think that in order to begin the process of healing I need to be brave and take charge of my life as it is now. And part of that is to stop the constant self-censorship that occurs in my head. That means if I want to swear, then I'm going to fucking swear. If I'm going to say how I feel about some stupid thing about the Church, then I'm just going to say it. If I'm ever going to get to a position where I value who I am I'll need to *know* who I am first, and in the thirty-odd years I've been alive, I've actually done precious little of that. Instead, the majority of my life has been angst about measuring up to the checklist of male advancement in Utah culture. The ideals and values I grew up with were never evaluated by myself: I never took a good hard look at any of them and asked, "Why does this even matter to me?" Be honest. Why? Be chaste. Why? Be brave. Why? I have answers to those questions now (and surprisingly, few of those admonitions have actually gone away, though some have change significantly, such as "be chaste"). They are no longer Eternal Principles handed down by a God from on high: they are MY ideals and MY principles to live by. And that makes a world of difference. Hopefully as you read over what I write here you'll be reading the story of a person recovering from the shortcoming of their past. My prediction: in regards to the Church my opinion is going to get worse before it gets better, but eventually I'd predict that I will find peace with it and eventually my interest in it and thinking about it will wane. But I'm not going to force that or prevent the anger. I'm just going to trust that eventually it gets better. In regards to myself, I think I'm on the way towards feeling better about myself. Even in being let go from my job, I feel I've make a huge break-through: I don't blame myself for what happened. It happened, and frankly I was doing the bet that I could have done. I couldn't have done better without resolving the problems I have and I'm working on that, so what else could have been done? It happened, and I just need to learn from it and keep my attention on getting the help I need. And I'd predict that I'll be discussing projects that I've been meaning to work on as I continue to work on them. I anticipate that someday soon I might actually finish something noteworthy.  We'll see, right? Not sure what else I can say. This isn't my coming out letter. This isn't my apologia. This isn't my creed, or a statement of any kind. It's just the way things are now and the way I hope things go. We'll see how that works.
